But first thing now, can you just tell us your name and where you were born, both in English and also in Urdu?
Urdu is not my language.
What is your language?
My language is Gujarati, but there's not many Gujaratis in Nepal.
Are you okay to say it in English and Gujarati?
You have to have the two languages.
It would be great. I would like to hear. I don't even know what it sounds like actually.
Can you speak Urdu?
I can't speak Urdu. It's okay.
Okay?
Yeah.
Okay. My name is Yasmin Jetwa. I was born in Africa, in East Africa, in Uganda.
And my birthplace was Kampala.
And in 1971, when EDM had overthrown the country, we were overthrown to different countries.
But because my mum had a British passport, we ended up in Britain as refugees.
But loads and loads of us came. So they were all scattered to Canada and India and Rome.
My dad went to Rome because he had a citizenship for that country. He couldn't join us.
And my uncle. And so when we come to Britain, it was October 1971, I think.
And it was snowing that time.
So the charity, there's charity, they're very popular.
Red Cross came to receive us on the bottom of the plain.
Took us to the camps. And the camp was in North Wales.
And it was a RAF camp. There was a big camp, but they were not occupied by them.
It was empty. So they replaced all the refugees in there.
Since two different places, but we ended up there anyway.
We were well looked after. They took lovely care of us.
Given us each and everything. Because when we came, we did an Avna thing.
On your suitcase?
And we were only, I was only young then. I think I was about 14.
And we stayed there. After a couple of months, they moved us to Leamington Spa in Warwickshire.
And then from there we stayed a couple of months, still refugees.
Then we went to Kensington in London.
In a big posh building they put us all in there.
And then from there I think we had to decide where we would like to go.
And to settle down. So they gave us a couple of choices.
But we couldn't decide because my dad and my uncle was not still here.
They were in Rome. So we had to wait for them to come over to join us.
So our family, my uncle, auntie's family, we were together with the children.
So when they came, then they sent them to Pontypryd and other different places.
They gave you a couple of choices. So when they, both uncle and my dad went to Pontypryd.
When they seen the sceneries, they were so beautiful and greenery.
And they thought, oh wow, they were somewhere in Kashmir.
So we had three houses between two families.
And from A to Z they provided us in the house. Everything brand new.
We were six siblings, my mom and dad.
So there was eight of us. They gave us one one of each of one one thing.
But they done it all nice for us, looked after us.
So we started going to school. But I was never ever interested in school.
In Uganda the English was compulsory. That was your language.
Their language, native, that was the next language, but very important language.
So I knew how to speak English anyway.
So I went to the school over there in Pontypryd for a couple of months.
Till I think I come to sixteen. Then I had a Saturday job.
And then from that onwards I just worked, worked.
And after in 1976 I married and moved to Newport.
And ever since I live in Newport.
I was still working till 1990. In between I had my children.
So I stopped in 1990. Then I became a housewife.
I'm from housewife. I found out slowly slowly there's some groups around.
I went to computer classes and some sewing classes.
And we met some of the friends which we are here. We met through the some.
From that I started going more and more and more out.
Different groups. See any people. I talk to them and find out is there anything happening.
And since that time I just kept occupied of myself and got involved with so many groups.
But my age alive group was first. Which I got committed to it.
So I think it started in 2008. Is that right?
Because I'm terrible with the dates you know.
Very first when Leon Taylor started the group.
Can you remember when you were about like 9 years old or 8 years old.
And what that was like growing up in Uganda.
My memory is not too good but I can just think of some things.
It was very hardship growing up.
Because we were not high class. We were not well off. We were just in between.
My dad was just working and over there women stayed home. My mum stayed home.
And the kids were only small then you know.
And me and my sister was brought up at my grandmother's house.
While she was 10 and I was 12.
Because we had to look after her.
Because she had a stroke and all that.
And the rest of the family started moving out to other different countries.
So our childhood was a bit of a sad.
Because we couldn't go to school anything. Because we were busy looking after granny.
But in between my auntie did try to put us in school to go and study you know.
So we had a bit of education from there not too much.
The childhood was ok but hard time.
We seen the poverty and we seen the hard times.
And when the curfews and things were happening before we were thrown out.
You know we were looking after my grandmother and my sister.
It was very scary.
My auntie was living next door but they were not much involved.
So me and my sister we seen a hardship since childhood.
What would you say that taught you? Is there anything that taught you?
That was teaching you around that time?
It taught us to see how people are to you.
And if you are not well off person or something.
You don't count it like you know.
When you are a basic person you don't count in that society.
And even your relatives put you down.
Because we didn't have a house or anything. We just had a rented property.
But the rest of the families were well off.
We were the low ones.
But we survived and from that it teaches you about poverty and all that.
Because we had gone through that. We got that feeling.
And when we see these Simon Seeker coming or they have got nothing you feel for them.
You can relate can't you?
That related is that.
Because I say to my sister sometimes she wears things.
I say don't forget your past.
You were brought up in a very simple way.
So you know don't forget your past.
Keep your past on.
So then you are what?
You said twelve you came over here.
Twelve to fourteen.
Fourteen.
You were coming over here.
What was that adjustment period?
The changing over.
What was that like for you?
Having to start.
Being settled in a new life and things like that.
It was very very different from there.
Totally different.
First the snow was snowing.
So it was so cold we never seen snow.
But going through that we went to the camp.
All the people who were there never bought.
We became like families.
But they had school in the camp as well.
Everything was provided in the doctor.
Everything.
It was just like a little shopping.
You know like your own camp with everything.
Facilities in there.
We had entertainments.
They used to take us out on the day trips.
They gave us a lot and they did a lot for us.
So going through that it was giving us a happy moment.
Because we had never seen that over there.
Especially our family you know.
And though my dad was not there so we were happy.
And we were happy.
And though my dad was not there so these people were looking after us as well.
So the experience was coming good.
But after settling in Pontypridd it was hard.
Because we were in a community where there was no Asians or anybody.
In a Welsh community.
And in the beginning we had a hard time.
But after I started working they all became my friends.
And everybody knew you because it was a small village there.
So that was keeping us happy then.
And what would you say was your favourite memory from that time?
My favourite memory?
Because you were not married and you were just free.
And you had friends.
You did so many things together.
Committed to anything.
And that was happy moments isn't it?
You were free then isn't it?
Yes.
What would you say was the most important thing that you had to leave behind?
In Africa?
Yeah.
The most important thing was because over there the lifestyle was different.
Even though you didn't have much but you were happy.
Sometimes the family used to take you on picnics and things which we were looking forward to there.
And it was nice.
Food wise you had your own.
The food we ate there was nice, fresh.
And it was different from here.
When we came first we missed all that.
Because it was totally different.
It was good times as well and bad times.
So what about the culture as well?
What was the culture and your practice of the culture?
Here?
In the beginning it was hard.
But the thing is when we were living, staying there because we knew there were no Asians.
So we had to adapt to wear English clothes as well.
When you go to work you can wear your own clothes.
Because you'll be an old one out.
You had to start adapting to it.
But we still kept our culture.
Till now I try to keep my culture.
But the children, they do half.
How were you able to keep your culture?
What things were you doing?
When there's an occasion, or when there's respect for the elders.
Or if there's a death they must go and respect.
This is all our culture.
You can sit with them and make some time and sympathize with them.
They're emotional.
Don't forget your culture.
Keep your culture going with your food specially.
Your language.
It's number one.
It happened with my children.
My mother-in-law showed that my children had to have the mother tongue.
No English was allowed.
Where now my grandchildren don't even speak our language.
Because they speak English.
The parents are English speaking to the kids.
Which we don't like it.
We're not happy.
But these days you can't say nothing to them.
You try to guide them the right way.
When you come to your religion, you guide them to keep your religion.
Don't go off to track.
Don't change into yourself too westernized.
Because I'm open minded.
So we leave it to half and half.
And don't push them too much.
But I still want them to carry on with little bit which we got in our culture.
You know.
Like we have our festivals and things.
They should know about it.
And on that day we must get together.
And share food and all that.
If you didn't remind them, they'll know about it.
Because there's so many other distractions now that can really deter away the people.
And most of the time they're in school.
They live in school more than.
And work.
They're only in the evening for a little short time.
We still live in Ponty Prid.
No, I live in Newport.
I moved in Newport in 1976.
And then my son was born in 1977.
I got married and moved here in 1977.
Then I had my first son.
And I've been since I'm in Newport.
Can you tell us about that time moving to Newport?
Newport, yeah it was hard.
Because when my husband and their family come from.
They're originally cousins.
My mum's cousins they were.
Me and my husband are distant cousins.
Because we can marry with cousins that time.
But now the kids won't have it.
They said they're my brother or my sister.
But we were really close.
And we were really close.
But then the kids won't have it.
They said they're my brother or my sister.
But that time when I got married to my husband.
They were living in one room.
In somebody's house.
We had two rooms already.
My in-laws were staying in one room.
Me and my husband were living in one room.
So we seen a hardship.
Because he came as well after.
Before we got married.
He didn't have a job or anything.
And we were only about 18.
And we had to see very hardship.
We both had to work.
And...
Sometimes he didn't have much food.
Because he didn't have much money.
Because the wage was only nine pounds then.
And we didn't have nothing.
We had to start from the scratch.
Going through difficulty.
Afterwards, Mother-in-law was collecting money for us.
She supported us.
And then we bought a house after a long time.
A unity.
And then the family had a unity.
This time they haven't.
You don't even know what your son or daughter earns.
When they have a wage.
You can't even ask them.
Because times have changed now.
But our time, we had to bring a wage.
And give Mother-in-law the money in Iran.
Because I was kept into the culture.
And respect.
But she was doing good for us.
Because she was collecting money for us to have a property.
So we worked very, very hard to reach here.
Not well, well off.
But we are comfortable.
Exactly.
Can you speak about certain jobs?
Is there certain jobs that you've had that you've enjoyed as well?
What might have been a new point?
What would have been?
Well, before I was working in the supermarkets.
Which was my favourite.
Because I loved talking to people.
I had a lot of friends.
But then when I got married I had to come to Newport.
And then start in a sewing factory.
It was a hard time.
Because it was all white.
And I was only Asian.
And because I had little experience from Conti Pits.
Because that was a white area.
So I'm blending alright with them.
I kept my limit.
But I had to blend in with them.
To keep me going.
Otherwise if I didn't I'd be in one corner.
But then you always find one or two.
Which was very nasty people.
But we survived.
So since then I just worked in the sewing factories.
Till 1990.
And then where did you go?
Then I finished because I had to look after my mother-in-law.
Who looked after us.
And she's become ill for eight years.
So I had to look after her then.
You were talking about kind of even the money aspect of when we were working.
And you were giving it to your mother-in-law.
And then that was helping you in terms of building the house.
How important is that?
And what ways can we...
Is there certain ways that we can start getting back to that in a way?
It was very good because I was very happy to be able to help my mother-in-law.
And I was very happy to be able to help her.
And she was very kind.
And she was very nice.
It was very good because that time you had the limit of spending money as well.
Because instead of a bank, it was collected for you, for your future.
You know, like she was putting her money, my husband was putting mine.
Like going in a little money box or wherever.
So that was very important.
If we didn't do that, we wouldn't have a house now.
We would spend and spend.
And we wouldn't have been in a council house or something.
Because we did get in a council house.
From after we got married, we had one boy.
And because the condition of the house was very bad, they put us in an old way.
And it was a big, beautiful four bedroom house.
For four people.
We could have stayed there all our life, but we didn't want that lifestyle.
We wanted to work hard and have your own property to stay in.
Nobody will check you out or anything.
Because all the days are rough, all the way.
So that's why it helped us, you know, having a unity.
But we wish that unity was still there.
But everybody got their own mind now.
Because they've been grown up in this country and they...
Back home, we used to have a lot of money.
But we didn't have a lot of money.
So we had to work hard.
And we had to work hard.
We were grown up in this country and they...
Back home, we used to do the same, I think.
Parents were in charge and they always thought good things for your children.
And we were much more connected.
Connected with each other.
But that connection is not the same like...
I agree.
So speaking about kind of connection, can you speak more about your connection to kind of age alive as well?
Yeah. Since I got connected to age alive, there was only a handful of people.
But we recruit...
Because it was a multi-BME group.
And we had to have all cultures which we liked.
So we recruited people and brought them to the group.
Me and my sister, we gave a lot of time.
In the beginning, this lot was not even there.
It was only a handful.
And when you see anybody on the road with a smile, you say,
Hello, would you like to come in and join our group?
It's a lovely group. Get you out of the house.
Come and join. Come and see what it's like.
And through that, people started coming.
So you see our group is multicultural.
And when I started going to Shalom, I told them about it because they were all Jamaican people there.
So I brought them here as well.
I put my heart deep into age alive.
Until today, we took all the commitments to let it run.
And it's just part of my family.
Age alive is...
Thank you.
How do you think age alive has supported other black, Asian, minority or majority groups?
It helped them come out of their houses.
Most of them were housewives, I think Asian culture ones.
Pushed them to come to the group, have the enjoyment, have the exercise and this and that.
And they started enjoying all that.
So they're looking forward once a week to go to the group.
And that's a big day for them.
And everybody look forward to see each other on Wednesdays.
Go on the trips, which they all love.
So that kept us all together.
And we hope that carries on and continues in the future.
And the last question is, have you got any kind of memorabilia, which is any photos and things like that, that you'd like to share?
Photos from where?
From whether you're younger or with family or any of the experiences that we spoke about.
Or even your first times in age alive?
Yeah.
If anything like that that you'd like to share.
I'd love to have a look for photos from I think age alive.
The good times we were having when we were going on trips and all year in there.
We were all big groups that time.
And a few of the friends passed away from age alive, which I miss them terribly.
Especially my friend who went to the Navy.
We had a lot of connection, so much connection, till she died.
You can still see her.
Good old memories.
Is there anything else that you'd like to share?
That's all.
Well done to Roy, he keeps us going.
Till the last moment, we pray for him.
He's the only one keeping us going, one man with all the women.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
But other language might be a bit awkward for me.
Like my language or the... Can I just leave it to English?
Yes, yes you can.